---
title: "In Vivo Assessment Of Optimal Bvalue Range For Perfusioninsensitive Apparent Diffusion Coefficient Imaging"
date: 2012-07-20
authors: ['M Freiman', 'SD Voss', 'RV Mulkern', 'JM PerezRossello', 'MJ Callahan', 'SK Warfield']
DOI: 10.1118/1.4736516
journal: "Medical Physics"
categories: 

---
<jats:sec><jats:title>Purpose:</jats:title><jats:p>To assess the optimal<jats:italic>b</jats:italic>values range for perfusioninsensitive apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) imaging of abdominal organs using shortduration DWMRI acquisitions with currently available ADC estimation methods.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Methods:</jats:title><jats:p>DWMRI data of 15 subjects were acquired with eight<jats:italic>b</jats:italic>values in the range of 5800 s/mm<jats:sup>2</jats:sup>. The referencestandard, a perfusion insensitive, ADC value (ADC<jats:sub>IVIM</jats:sub>), was computed using an intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM) model with all acquired diffusionweighted images. Simulated DWMRI data was generated using an IVIM model with <jats:italic>b</jats:italic>values in the range of 01200 s/mm<jats:sup>2</jats:sup>. Monoexponential ADC estimates were calculated using: (1) Twopoint estimator (ADC<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>); (2) least squares threepoint (ADC<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>) estimator and; (3) Rician noise model estimator (ADC<jats:sub>R</jats:sub>). The authors found the optimal <jats:italic>b</jats:italic>values for perfusioninsensitive ADC calculations by minimizing the relative root mean square error (RRMS) between the ADC<jats:sub>IVIM</jats:sub> and the monoexponential ADC values for each estimation method and organ.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results:</jats:title><jats:p>Low<jats:italic>b</jats:italic>value = 300 s/mm<jats:sup>2</jats:sup> and high <jats:italic>b</jats:italic>value = 1200 s/mm<jats:sup>2</jats:sup> minimized the RRMS between the estimated ADC and the referencestandard ADC<jats:sub>IVIM</jats:sub> to less than 5% using the ADC<jats:sub>3</jats:sub> estimator. By considering only the <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> DWMRI data, the combination of low <jats:italic>b</jats:italic>value = 270 s/mm<jats:sup>2</jats:sup> and high <jats:italic>b</jats:italic>value of 800 s/mm<jats:sup>2</jats:sup> minimized the RRMS between the estimated ADC and the referencestandard ADC<jats:sub>IVIM</jats:sub> to &lt;7% using the ADC<jats:sub>3</jats:sub> estimator. For all estimators, the RRMS between the estimated ADC and the reference standard ADC correlated strongly with the perfusionfraction parameter of the IVIM model (r = [0.780.83], p  0.003).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions:</jats:title><jats:p>The perfusion compartment in DWMRI signal decay correlates strongly with the RRMS in ADC estimates from shortduration DWMRI. The impact of the perfusion compartment on ADC estimations depends, however, on the choice of<jats:italic>b</jats:italic>values and estimation method utilized. Likewise, perfusionrelated errors can be reduced to &lt;7% by carefully selecting the <jats:italic>b</jats:italic>values used for ADC calculations and method of estimation.</jats:p></jats:sec>
            