---
title: "Improving Cctabased Lesions' Hemodynamic Significance Assessment By Accounting For Partial Volume Modeling In Automatic Coronary Lumen Segmentation"
date: 2017-03-01
authors: ['M Freiman', 'H Nickisch', 'S Prevrhal', 'H Schmitt', 'M Vembar', 'P MaurovichHorvat', 'P Donnelly', 'L Goshen']
DOI: 10.1002/mp.12121
journal: "Medical Physics"
categories: 
  - Segmentation
---
<jats:sec><jats:title>Purpose</jats:title><jats:p>The goal of this study was to assess the potential added benefit of accounting for partial volume effects (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content>) in an automatic coronary lumen segmentation algorithm that is used to determine the hemodynamic significance of a coronary artery stenosis from coronary computed tomography angiography (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CCTA</jats:styled-content>).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Materials and methods</jats:title><jats:p>Two sets of data were used in our work: (a) multivendor <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CCTA</jats:styled-content> datasets of 18 subjects from the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MICCAI</jats:styled-content> 2012 challenge with automatically generated centerlines and 3 reference segmentations of 78 coronary segments and (b) additional <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CCTA</jats:styled-content> datasets of 97 subjects with 132 coronary lesions that had invasive reference standard <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FFR</jats:styled-content> measurements. We extracted the coronary artery centerlines for the 97 datasets by an automated software program followed by manual correction if required. An automatic machinelearningbased algorithm segmented the coronary tree with and without accounting for the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content>. We obtained <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CCTA</jats:styled-content>based <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FFR</jats:styled-content> measurements using a flow simulation in the coronary trees that were generated by the automatic algorithm with and without accounting for <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content>. We assessed the potential added value of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content> integration as a part of the automatic coronary lumen segmentation algorithm by means of segmentation accuracy using the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MICCAI</jats:styled-content> 2012 challenge framework and by means of flow simulation overall accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, negative and positive predictive values, and the receiver operated characteristic (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">ROC</jats:styled-content>) area under the curve. We also evaluated the potential benefit of accounting for <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content> in automatic segmentation for flow simulation for lesions that were diagnosed as obstructive based on <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CCTA</jats:styled-content> which could have indicated a need for an invasive exam and revascularization.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>Our segmentation algorithm improves the maximal surface distance error by ~39% compared to previously published method on the 18 datasets from the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MICCAI</jats:styled-content> 2012 challenge with comparable Dice and mean surface distance. Results with and without accounting for <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content> were comparable. In contrast, integrating <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content> analysis into an automatic coronary lumen segmentation algorithm improved the flow simulation specificity from 0.6 to 0.68 with the same sensitivity of 0.83. Also, accounting for <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content> improved the area under the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">ROC</jats:styled-content> curve for detecting hemodynamically significant <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CAD</jats:styled-content> from 0.76 to 0.8 compared to automatic segmentation without <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content> analysis with invasive <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FFR</jats:styled-content> threshold of 0.8 as the reference standard. Accounting for <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PVE</jats:styled-content> in flow simulation to support the detection of hemodynamic significant disease in <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CCTA</jats:styled-content>based obstructive lesions improved specificity from 0.51 to 0.73 with same sensitivity of 0.83 and the area under the curve from 0.69 to 0.79. The improvement in the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AUC</jats:styled-content> was statistically significant (<jats:italic>N</jats:italic>=76, Delong's test, <jats:italic>P</jats:italic>=0.012).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusion</jats:title><jats:p>Accounting for the partial volume effects in automatic coronary lumen segmentation algorithms has the potential to improve the accuracy of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CCTA</jats:styled-content>based hemodynamic assessment of coronary artery lesions.</jats:p></jats:sec>
            