---
title: "Lunet: Deep Learning For The Segmentation Of Arterioles And Venules In High Resolution Fundus Images"
date: 2024-05-01
authors: ['J Fhima', 'J Van Eijgen', 'M Billen Moulin-Romse', 'H Brackenier', 'H Kulenovic', 'V Debeuf', 'M Vangilbergen', 'M Freiman', 'I Stalmans', 'JA Behar']
DOI: 10.1088/1361-6579/ad3d28
journal: "Physiological Measurement"
categories: 
  - Segmentation
---
<jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>
                  <jats:italic>Objective.</jats:italic> This study aims to automate the segmentation of retinal arterioles and venules (A/V) from digital fundus images (DFI), as changes in the spatial distribution of retinal microvasculature are indicative of cardiovascular diseases, positioning the eyes as windows to cardiovascular health. <jats:italic>Approach.</jats:italic> We utilized active learning to create a new DFI dataset with 240 crowd-sourced manual A/V segmentations performed by 15 medical students and reviewed by an ophthalmologist. We then developed LUNet, a novel deep learning architecture optimized for high-resolution A/V segmentation. The LUNet model features a double dilated convolutional block to widen the receptive field and reduce parameter count, alongside a high-resolution tail to refine segmentation details. A custom loss function was designed to prioritize the continuity of blood vessel segmentation. <jats:italic>Main Results.</jats:italic> LUNet significantly outperformed three benchmark A/V segmentation algorithms both on a local test set and on four external test sets that simulated variations in ethnicity, comorbidities and annotators. <jats:italic>Significance.</jats:italic> The release of the new datasets and the LUNet model (<jats:ext-link xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" ext-link-type="uri" xlink:href="https://www.aimlab-technion.com/lirot-ai" xlink:type="simple">www.aimlab-technion.com/lirot-ai</jats:ext-link>) provides a valuable resource for the advancement of retinal microvasculature analysis. The improvements in A/V segmentation accuracy highlight LUNet's potential as a robust tool for diagnosing and understanding cardiovascular diseases through retinal imaging.</jats:p>
            