---
title: "Predictors of complicated disease course in children andadults with ulcerative colitis: a nationwide study from the epi-iirn"
date: 2024-05-20
authors: ['O Atia', 'R Buchuk', 'R Lujan', 'S Greenfeld', 'R Kariv', 'Y Loewenberg Weisband', 'N Lederman', 'E Matz', 'O Ledder', 'E Zittan', 'H Yanai', 'D Shwartz', 'M Freiman', 'I Dotan', 'D Nevo', 'D Turner']
DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izae094
journal: "Inflammatory Bowel Diseases"
categories: 

---
<jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:sec>
                  <jats:title>Background</jats:title>
                  <jats:p>Data on predictors of complicated ulcerative colitis (UC) course from unselected populations cohorts are scarce. We aimed to utilize a nationwide cohort to explore predictors at diagnosis of disease course in children and adults with UC.</jats:p>
               </jats:sec>
               <jats:sec>
                  <jats:title>Methods</jats:title>
                  <jats:p>Data of patients diagnosed with UC since 2005 were retrieved from the nationwide epi-IIRN cohort. Complicated disease course was defined as colectomy, steroid-dependency, or the need for biologic drugs. Hierarchical clustering categorized disease severity at diagnosis based on complete blood count, albumin, C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), analyzed together.</jats:p>
               </jats:sec>
               <jats:sec>
                  <jats:title>Results</jats:title>
                  <jats:p>A total of 13471 patients with UC (1427 [11%] pediatric-onset) including 103212 person-years of follow-up were included. Complicated disease course was recorded in 2829 (21%) patients: 1052 (7.9%) escalated to biologics, 1357 (10%) experienced steroid-dependency, and 420 (3.1%) underwent colectomy. Probabilities of complicated disease course at 1 and 5 years from diagnosis were higher in pediatric-onset (11% and 32%, respectively) than adult-onset disease (4% and 16%; P&amp;lt;.001). In a Cox multivariate model, complicated course was predicted by induction therapy with steroids (hazard ratio [HR], 1.5; 95% CI, 1.2-2.0), extraintestinal manifestations (HR, 1.3; 95% CI, 1.03-1.5) and the disease severity clusters of blood tests (HR, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.01-3.1), while induction therapy with enemas (HR, 0.6; 95% CI, 0.5-0.7) and older age (HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.98-0.99) were associated with noncomplicated course.</jats:p>
               </jats:sec>
               <jats:sec>
                  <jats:title>Conclusion</jats:title>
                  <jats:p>In this nationwide cohort, the probability of complicated disease course during the first 5 years from diagnosis was 32% in pediatric-onset and 16% in adults with UC and was associated with more severe clusters of routinely collected laboratory tests, younger age at diagnosis, extraintestinal manifestations, and type of induction therapy.</jats:p>
               </jats:sec>
            